[INTERNAL] Ncov sit rep 2020 05 15 (#406)
nextstrain/ncov: narratives/ncov_sit-rep_2020-05-15.md

# [COVID-19 Resources](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?d=tree&p=full&legend=closed)

#### Nextstrain Resources
* [START HERE: How to read a phylogeny](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/trees-background/).
* [Previous Situation Reports](https://nextstrain.org/ncov-sit-reps/).
* [Explanatory Twitter threads](https://bedford.io/misc/twitter/).
* [Background on coronaviruses](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV).
* [Common misconceptions](https://nextstrain.org/narratives/ncov/sit-rep/2020-03-13?n=11).

#### External Resources
* [How coronavirus mutations and spreads (NYTimes)](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/30/science/coronavirus-mutations.html).
* [Ask a Scientist & FAQs](https://covid19.fas.org/l/en).
* [WHO Situation Reports](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports).
* [CDC Resources](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html).

<!-- This is the right-side text -->
```auspiceMainDisplayMarkdown

# Situation Report Hiatus
<p>
Early in the pandemic, it was unclear how SARS-CoV-2 was moving between countries, where it was circulating locally, and how localized outbreaks were related.

> Over the last four months, we've tackled these questions and more in our weekly Situation Reports. At this stage of the pandemic, it's clear that these broad-strokes patterns are largely consistent across regions and countries:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the last four months, we've tackled these questions - and more - in our weekly Situation Reports. At this stage of the pandemic, it's clear that these broad-strokes patterns are largely consistent across regions and countries:  
```
Just to clarify sentence structure. I read it super awkwardly first time: "we've tackled these questions" / "and more in our weekly Situation Reports"

</p>
<p/>

- Outbreaks across even distant parts of the world are deeply intertwined.<p/>

- Through human migration and travel, the virus has been introduced to most communities multiple times.<p/>  

> - Once these "sparks" land in a new community, many fizzle out without causing widespread transmission. Subject to local conditions and a bit of chance, some of these sparks grow into local outbreaks.<p/>  

Reviewer: I like this! More convo around the fact that every intro doesn't start a epidemic would be good. I've had to explain this a lot!

- Eventually, these local outbreaks send of sparks of their own, spreading to new locations.  
<p/>

Unsurprisingly, we see this pattern in countries experiencing their first wave of infections. More alarmingly, we also see this pattern after reintroduction to  countries where the initial peak passed months beforehand.
Ultimately, this pattern is only broken when a country is able to effectively test, trace, and isolate cases immediately.
<br><br>

> This means that outbreaks across the world are deeply intertwined, and the battle against COVID-19 will always be global -- we can't conquer the virus anywhere without addressing it everywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that outbreaks across the world are deeply connected, and the battle against COVID-19 will always be global -- we can't conquer the virus anywhere without addressing it everywhere.
```
Used 'intertwined' above :)

I worry a little about this wording just because of places like NZ. Clearly, their approach isn't long-term, but in the short term they do indeed seem to have conquered the virus. But I may be overthinking it.

<br><br>

> But, at this stage of the pandemic, genomic epidemiology is most urgently needed within hyperlocal communities through local public health offices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, at this stage of the pandemic, genomic epidemiology is most urgently needed within local and hyperlocal communities through local public health offices.
```
In some places I think it's still needed at country level (small European countries), and others at division/state/canton level - minor point but I think this covers from city to larger region!

<br><br>

> As such, this will be our last weekly Situation Report for awhile as we shift our focus to supporting local public health officials.

Reviewer: Just a _little_ unsure about this wording as I feel like this may lay more of a groundwork than we intend to. While we're certainly supporting local public health officials, I'm not sure I'd like to imply it's our new focus (or that we have only one focus!). 

Maybe just changing slightly to "...our last weekly Situation Report for a while, though we aim to support similar reports from local public health officials." ?

<br><br>

> We will, of course, continue daily updates to the global & regional builds as new sequences are posted to GISAID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will, of course, continue daily updates to the global & regional builds as new sequences are made available.
```

When the big-picture data says something new, we'll also issue additional Situation Reports.
All of these updates will be posted to the [Nextstrain twitter account](https://twitter.com/nextstrain) (as always).  
<br><br>

You can also find <a href="https://nextstrain.org/ncov-sit-reps/">all of our previous Situation Reports here</a>.

```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Viral mutations are normal](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&m=div&p=full&legend=open)

SARS-CoV-2 is a [coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV). Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has a genome encoded in RNA (rather than DNA).
<br><br>
Viruses infect cells because they need to borrow cellular machinery to replicate. For RNA viruses, this process is quite error-prone, as most RNA polymerases (the cellular machines that make copies of RNA) aren't able to proofread and correct their work. This leads to frequent mutations in the viral genome; these are normal and expected.
<br><br>

> Importantly, the vast majority of these mutations either "break" the virus such that it can't transmit and/or replicate anymore, or don't change the virus at all because of [redundant encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synonymous_substitution).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Importantly, the vast majority of these mutations either "break" the virus such that it can't transmit and/or replicate anymore, or don't change the virus at all because of [redundant encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synonymous_substitution). 
This means that the mutations don't change the proteins of the virus in any way.
Other changes may modify a protein of the virus very slightly, but not impact the function at all.
```

Rarely, a mutation can help the virus replicate and/or transmit better, but nearly all of these changes still have only a tiny effect.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Viral mutations are useful for tracing outbreaks](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-ORF3a_57&d=tree,entropy&f_division=New%20York&m=div&p=full)

These mutations can be used as "bread crumbs" to trace the history of a given sample. Just as the people in your family share unique combinations of genetic characteristics, closely related viral samples share unique combinations of genetic mutations.
<br><br>

> For example, here we show the viral "family tree" with each sample colored by which amino acid is present at a specific location in the viral genome (ORF1a, site 57). Highlighting samples from New York, we see that most of the cases from New York and Europe have the amino acid Histidine ("H") rather than Glutamine ("Q") at this position. This, in combination with all the other sites in the genome, tells us that these cases are all closely related to each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, here we show the viral "family tree" with each sample colored by which amino acid is present at a specific location in the viral genome (gene "ORF1a", site 57). 
Highlighting samples from New York, we see that most of the cases from New York and Europe have the amino acid Histidine ("H") rather than Glutamine ("Q") at this position. This, in combination with all the other sites in the genome, tells us that these cases are all closely related to each other.
<br><br>
You can also see the position in gene "ORF3a" highlighted on the chart at the bottom of the left.
```

<br><br>
For a more in-depth explanation of these concepts, we recommend [this visual explanation](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/30/science/coronavirus-mutations.html) by Jonathan Corum and Carl Zimmer.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [The mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 is typical for a coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&l=clock&p=full)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [The mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 is typical for a coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&l=clock&p=full)
```

Because mutations are biologically inevitable, they tend to accumulate at a steady rate over time.
<br><br>

> Here, the x axis shows the date that each sample was collected. The y axis shows the *total number* of mutations away from the root of the tree. Each sample is colored by which region of the world it was collected in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the x axis shows the date that each sample was collected. The y axis shows the *total number* of mutations each strain is away from the root of the tree. Each sample is colored by the date it was collected.
```
At the moment they're coloured by sampling date. I changed the text to match this, but alternatively colour by region!

<br><br>

> While there are certainly some outliers, on average, we see changes accumulate at a rate of ~24 substitutions per year. This means that if a single viral lineage were transmitting from one person to the next for a full year, we'd expect it to accumulate roughly 24 substitutions by the end of the year. Importantly, this corresponds to only (24/30,000)\*100\% = ~0.08\% of the viral genome changing each year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there are certainly some outliers, on average, we see changes accumulate at a rate of ~24 substitutions per year. This means that if a single viral lineage were transmitting from one person to the next for a full year, we'd expect its entire genome to accumulate roughly 24 substitutions by the end of the year. 
As the whole genome is ~30,000 bases, this corresponds to only (24/30,000)\*100\% = ~0.08\% of the viral genome changing each year.
```

<br><br>

> For context, SARS (also a coronavirus) accumulates XX substitutions per year (changing XX\% of its genome), while influenza accumulates XX substitutions per year (changing XX\% of its genome).

Reviewer: SARS probably not a good example. It's basically the same as SARS-CoV-2 (all the coronaviruses are). So your above numbers will basically work here...
Flu also tricky because it's much smaller than coronavirus. So it also has ~25 muts per year & ~2 per month (per genome) but as the genome is 13-14k, that translates to ~0.16\% genome change (guessing - didn't actually do the math). 

In the FT piece I helped with, I gave things as mutations per 1,000 bases in a year because it avoided this problem - but it's obviously, clearly nonstandard. Here's what I told them: "On average, SARS-CoV-2 would have one mutation every 1000 bases in a year, whereas Flu would have on average 2 mutations every 1000 bases. On the same scale, HIV would have on average 4 mutations every 1000 bases in a year."

Author: This is fantastic, thank you Emma.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [As far as we know, there is only 1 strain of SARS-CoV-2](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?branchLabel=clade&c=clade_membership&d=tree&p=full)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [As far as we know, there is only 1 strain of SARS-CoV-2](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?branchLabel=clade&c=clade_membership&d=tree&p=full)
```

There have been many reports about multiple "strains" of SARS-CoV-2.

> First, a clarification: when virologists use the word "strain," it often just refers to a useful label so we can all refer to the same group of samples (e.g., our clade labels shown here). This does *not* imply any known functional difference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, a clarification: when virologists use the word "strain," it's often just as a useful label so we can all refer to the same group of samples (e.g., our clade labels, shown here). This does *not* imply any known functional difference.
```

<br><br>
Separately, "strain" can be used to refer to viral genotypes that are functionally distinct, either biologically (e.g., pathogenicity/disease severity) and/or epidemiologically (e.g., transmissibility).
Importantly, though, determining whether two genotypes actually *are* functionally distinct requires much more experimental, clinical and epidemiological data than we currently have.
<br><br>
One of the most prominent hypotheses about SARS-CoV-2 strains compares possible "D614" vs "G614" strains. We can use Nextstrain to investigate.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [D614G may be related to transmissibility, but could also be explained by geography](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-S_614&gmax=25778&gmin=21082&p=full)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [D614G may be related to transmissibility, but could also be explained by geography](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-S_614&gmax=25778&gmin=21082&p=full)
```

> [A recent paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.29.069054v1) suggests that a single mutation, D614G (from amino acid "D" to "G" at site 614), may be responsible for increasing the transmissibility and/or pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[A recent pre-print](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.29.069054v1) suggests that a single mutation, D614G (from amino acid "D" to "G" at site 614 in the "S" ('spike') protein), may be responsible for increasing the transmissibility and/or pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2.
```
I think mostly they talk about transmissibility though - not pathogenicity. Haven't read paper recently enough to be 100% of this, but worth checking & maybe removing if it's mostly transmit.

Reviewer 2: Yes, primarily about transmissibility, they don't find any evidence of clinical outcome changes.

* [Ask a Scientist & FAQs](https://covid19.fas.org/l/en).
* [WHO Situation Reports](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports).
* [CDC Resources](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html).

<!-- This is the right-side text -->
```auspiceMainDisplayMarkdown

# Situation Report Hiatus
<p>
Early in the pandemic, it was unclear how SARS-CoV-2 was moving between countries, where it was circulating locally, and how localized outbreaks were related.
Over the last four months, we've tackled these questions - and more - in our weekly Situation Reports. At this stage of the pandemic, it's clear that some broad-strokes patterns are largely consistent across regions and countries:  
</p>
<p/>

- Outbreaks across even distant parts of the world are deeply intertwined.<p/>

- Through human migration and travel, the virus has been introduced to most communities multiple times.<p/>  

- Once these "sparks" land in a new community, many fizzle out without causing widespread transmission. Subject to local conditions and a bit of chance, some of these sparks grow into local outbreaks.<p/>  

> - Eventually, these local outbreaks send of sparks of their own, spreading to new locations.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Eventually, these local outbreaks send off sparks of their own, spreading to new locations.  
```

<p/>

> Unsurprisingly, we see this pattern in countries experiencing their first wave of infections. More alarmingly, we also see this pattern after reintroduction to  countries where the initial peak passed months beforehand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unsurprisingly, we see this pattern in countries experiencing their first wave of infections. More alarmingly, we also see this pattern after re-introductions of the virus to countries where the initial peak passed months beforehand.
```
For clarity

Ultimately, this pattern is only broken when a country is able to effectively test, trace, and isolate cases immediately.
<br><br>

This means that outbreaks across the world are deeply connected, and the battle against COVID-19 will always be global -- we can't conquer the virus anywhere without addressing it everywhere.
<br><br>

> But, at this stage of the pandemic, genomic epidemiology is most urgently needed within local and hyperlocal communities through local public health offices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this stage of the pandemic, genomic epidemiology is most urgently needed within local and hyperlocal communities through local public health offices.
```

<br><br>

> As such, this will be our last weekly Situation Report for awhile as we shift our focus to supporting local public health officials.

Author: ```suggestion
As such, this will be our last weekly Situation Report for a while, though we aim to support similar reports from local public health officials.
```

<br><br>

We will, of course, continue daily updates to the global & regional builds as new sequences are made available.
When the big-picture data says something new, we'll also issue additional Situation Reports.
All of these updates will be posted to the [Nextstrain twitter account](https://twitter.com/nextstrain) (as always).  
<br><br>

You can also find <a href="https://nextstrain.org/ncov-sit-reps/">all of our previous Situation Reports here</a>.

```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [Viral mutations are normal](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&m=div&p=full&legend=open)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# [Changes in viral genomes over time are normal](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&m=div&p=full&legend=open)
```

> SARS-CoV-2 is a [coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV). Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has a genome encoded in RNA (rather than DNA).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the disease COVID-19, is a [coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV). Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has a genome encoded in RNA (rather than DNA).
```

<br><br>

> Viruses infect cells because they need to borrow cellular machinery to replicate. For RNA viruses, this process is quite error-prone, as most RNA polymerases (the cellular machines that make copies of RNA) aren't able to proofread and correct their work. This leads to frequent mutations in the viral genome; these are normal and expected.

Reviewer 3: `the cellular machines that make copies of RNA` sounds like the RNA pol is from the host

<br><br>
Importantly, the vast majority of these mutations either "break" the virus such that it can't transmit and/or replicate anymore, or don't change the virus at all because of [redundant encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synonymous_substitution). 

> This means that the mutations don't change the proteins of the virus in any way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that the mutations don't change the proteins, and therefore function, of the virus in any way.
```

> Other changes may modify a protein of the virus very slightly, but not impact the function at all.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even changes to proteins often have only a minor impact on the functionality of those proteins.
```

> Rarely, a mutation can help the virus replicate and/or transmit better, but nearly all of these changes still have only a tiny effect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rarely, a change in the genetic code of a virus can help it to replicate and/or transmit better, but nearly all of these changes still have only a tiny effect.
```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [Viral mutations are useful for tracing outbreaks](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-ORF3a_57&d=tree,entropy&f_division=New%20York&m=div&p=full)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# [Differences in the genetic code of viruses are useful for tracing outbreaks](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-ORF3a_57&d=tree,entropy&f_division=New%20York&m=div&p=full)
```

> These mutations can be used as "bread crumbs" to trace the history of a given sample. Just as the people in your family share unique combinations of genetic characteristics, closely related viral samples share unique combinations of genetic mutations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These differences in the genomes between viruses can be used as "bread crumbs" to trace the history of a given sample. 
Just as the people in your family share unique combinations of genetic characteristics, closely related viral samples share unique combinations of genetic mutations.
```

<br><br>
For example, here we show the viral "family tree" with each sample colored by which amino acid is present at a specific location in the viral genome (ORF1a, site 57). Highlighting samples from New York, we see that most of the cases from New York and Europe have the amino acid Histidine ("H") rather than Glutamine ("Q") at this position. This, in combination with all the other sites in the genome, tells us that these cases are all closely related to each other.
<br><br>
For a more in-depth explanation of these concepts, we recommend [this visual explanation](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/30/science/coronavirus-mutations.html) by Jonathan Corum and Carl Zimmer.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [The mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 is typical for a coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&l=clock&p=full)  

> Because mutations are biologically inevitable, they tend to accumulate at a steady rate over time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because changes in genomes are randomly occurring, they tend to accumulate over time.
This leads to the genomes of viruses that shared a common ancestor more recently having a more similar genome that those sharing a common ancestor further in the past
```

<br><br>

> Here, the x axis shows the date that each sample was collected. The y axis shows the *total number* of mutations away from the root of the tree. Each sample is colored by which region of the world it was collected in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here, the x axis shows the date that each sample was collected. The y axis shows the *total number* of substitutions away from the root of the tree. Each sample is colored by which region of the world it was collected in.
```

<br><br>

> While there are certainly some outliers, on average, we see changes accumulate at a rate of ~24 substitutions per year. This means that if a single viral lineage were transmitting from one person to the next for a full year, we'd expect it to accumulate roughly 24 substitutions by the end of the year. Importantly, this corresponds to only (24/30,000)\*100\% = ~0.08\% of the viral genome changing each year.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While there are certainly some outliers, on average, we see changes accumulate at a rate of ~24 substitutions per year. This means that if a single viral lineage were transmitting from one person to the next for a full year, we'd expect it to accumulate roughly 33 substitutions by the end of the year. Importantly, this corresponds to only (33/30,000)\*100\% = [~0.11\% of the viral genome changing each year](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.04.077735v1.abstract).
```

<br><br>
For context, SARS (also a coronavirus) accumulates XX substitutions per year (changing XX\% of its genome), while influenza accumulates XX substitutions per year (changing XX\% of its genome).

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [As far as we know, there is only 1 strain of SARS-CoV-2](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?branchLabel=clade&c=clade_membership&d=tree&p=full)  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# [As far as we know, there is only one strain of SARS-CoV-2](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?branchLabel=clade&c=clade_membership&d=tree&p=full)  
```

<br><br>
One of the most prominent hypotheses about SARS-CoV-2 strains compares possible "D614" vs "G614" strains. We can use Nextstrain to investigate.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [D614G may be related to transmissibility, but could also be explained by geography](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-S_614&gmax=25778&gmin=21082&p=full)  

[A recent paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.29.069054v1) suggests that a single mutation, D614G (from amino acid "D" to "G" at site 614), may be responsible for increasing the transmissibility and/or pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2.
<br><br>
The primary evidence for this hypothesis is based on how relative frequencies of each genotype change over time.
If a given genotype is bad at transmitting, it is expected to decrease in frequency over time (and vice versa).
<br><br>
For this site, we see a number of geographic locations where initially, most viral lineages in circulation had the D allele; later, this balance flips such that most lineages have the G allele.

> This *could* be a hallmark of G being slightly "fitter" than D (e.g., if it did indeed have a slightly higher R0 through increased transmissibility).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This *could* be a hallmark of G being slightly "fitter" than D (e.g., if viruses with the G mutation had a slightly higher R0 through increased transmissibility).
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure the audience this is targeted to will know what R0 means.

#### ...as an individual
* Practice strict social distancing, especially if you are in a vulnerable group.
* Remember that even if you are not super vulnerable, many people around you are; follow these practices to protect others.
* Wash your hands "like you just chopped a jalapeno and have to change a contact lens."
* Stay home as much as possible -- especially  if you are sick; be prepared with extra supplies in case you need to self-quarantine.
* If you are an employer, encourage your employees to work from home wherever possible.

#### ...as an official
* Make testing free and broadly available.
* Put strong social distancing measures in place.
* Fund and implement extensive contact tracing efforts.
* Financially support those impacted by social distancing measures.

<!-- This is the right-side text -->
```auspiceMainDisplayMarkdown
# Takeaways  

#### Viruses naturally acquire mutations as they replicate. This is normal. Mutations can also help us trace the course of epidemics.  

#### SARS-CoV-2 mutation rate is very typical for coronaviruses.

#### As far as we know, there is only 1 functional "strain" of SARS-CoV-2.  

> #### Teasing apart the biological impact of specific mutations can be tricky -- many perceived differences can be attributed to chance and epidemiological factors.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Teasing apart the biological impact of specific mutations is tricky -- many perceived differences can be attributed to chance and epidemiological factors.  
```

<br><br>

But, at this stage of the pandemic, genomic epidemiology is most urgently needed within local and hyperlocal communities through local public health offices.
<br><br>

As such, this will be our last weekly Situation Report for a while, though we aim to support similar reports from local public health officials.
<br><br>

We will, of course, continue daily updates to the global & regional builds as new sequences are made available.
When the big-picture data says something new, we'll also issue additional Situation Reports.
All of these updates will be posted to the [Nextstrain twitter account](https://twitter.com/nextstrain) (as always).  
<br><br>

You can also find <a href="https://nextstrain.org/ncov-sit-reps/">all of our previous Situation Reports here</a>.

```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [Viral mutations are normal](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&m=div&p=full&legend=open)

SARS-CoV-2 is a [coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/help/coronavirus/human-CoV). Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has a genome encoded in RNA (rather than DNA).
<br><br>

> Viruses infect cells because they need to borrow cellular machinery to replicate. For RNA viruses, this process is quite error-prone, as most RNA polymerases (the cellular machines that make copies of RNA) aren't able to proofread and correct their work. This leads to frequent mutations in the viral genome; these are normal and expected.

Author: ```suggestion
Viruses infect cells because they need to borrow cellular machinery to replicate. For RNA viruses, this process is quite error-prone, as most RNA polymerases (the molecular machines that make copies of RNA) aren't able to proofread and correct their work. This leads to frequent mutations in the viral genome; these are normal and expected.
```

These mutations can be used as "bread crumbs" to trace the history of a given sample. Just as the people in your family share unique combinations of genetic characteristics, closely related viral samples share unique combinations of genetic mutations.
<br><br>
For example, here we show the viral "family tree" with each sample colored by which amino acid is present at a specific location in the viral genome (gene "ORF1a", site 57). 
<br><br>
Highlighting samples from New York, we see that most of the cases from New York and Europe have the amino acid Histidine ("H") rather than Glutamine ("Q") at this position. This, in combination with all the other sites in the genome, tells us that these cases are all closely related to each other.
<br><br>
You can also see the position in gene "ORF3a" highlighted on the chart at the bottom of the left.
<br><br>
For a more in-depth explanation of these concepts, we recommend [this visual explanation](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/30/science/coronavirus-mutations.html) by Jonathan Corum and Carl Zimmer.

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [The mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 is typical for a coronavirus](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&l=clock&p=full)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# [The evolutionary rate of SARS-CoV-2 is similar to SARS-CoV-1 and MERS](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=num_date&d=tree,entropy&l=clock&p=full)
```

> Because mutations are biologically inevitable, they tend to accumulate at a steady rate over time.

Author: ```suggestion
Because viral genomes inevitably change, these differences tend to accumulate at a steady rate over time.
```

<br><br>
Here, the x axis shows the date that each sample was collected. The y axis shows the *total number* of mutations each strain is away from the root of the tree. Each sample is colored by the date it was collected.
<br><br>

> While there are certainly some outliers, on average, we see changes accumulate at a rate of ~24 substitutions per year. This means that if a single viral lineage were transmitting from one person to the next for a full year, we'd expect its entire genome to accumulate roughly 24 substitutions by the end of the year. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While there are certainly some outliers, on average, we see changes accumulate at a rate of ~33 substitutions per year. 
This means that if a single viral lineage were transmitting from one person to the next for a full year, we'd expect its entire genome to accumulate roughly 33 substitutions by the end of the year. 
```

Author: @nicfel -- 24?
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12618847/82096918-b732de80-96b6-11ea-8a7d-ce8e97ff4abc.png)

> As the whole genome is ~30,000 bases, this corresponds to only (24/30,000)\*100\% = ~0.08\% of the viral genome changing each year.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the whole genome is ~30,000 bases, this corresponds to only (33/30,000)\*100\% = ~0.11\% of the viral genome changing each year.
```

<br><br>

> For context, SARS (also a coronavirus) accumulates XX substitutions per year (changing XX\% of its genome), while influenza accumulates XX substitutions per year (changing XX\% of its genome).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For context, [SARS-CoV-1](https://bmcevolbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2148-4-21) and [MERS](https://elifesciences.org/articles/31257), both coronaviruses, have very similar estimates of the evolutionary rates.
```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->

> # [As far as we know, there is only 1 strain of SARS-CoV-2](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?branchLabel=clade&c=clade_membership&d=tree&p=full)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# [Genetically different viruses are circulating, but little to no evidence for different behavior](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?branchLabel=clade&c=clade_membership&d=tree&p=full)
```

There have been many reports about multiple "strains" of SARS-CoV-2.

> First, a clarification: when virologists use the word "strain," it's often just as a useful label so we can all refer to the same group of samples (e.g., our clade labels, shown here). This does *not* imply any known functional difference.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What is referred to as a "strain", can differ between people using the term and doesn't always mean that there is a functional difference between viruses from different "strains".
We here consider different strains to be different viruses that exhibit different behavior. 
This could, for example, be the case for viruses having different clinical outcomes, different speed of transmission or the ability to re-infect people that are immune to different strains.
```

<br><br>

> Separately, "strain" can be used to refer to viral genotypes that are functionally distinct, either biologically (e.g., pathogenicity/disease severity) and/or epidemiologically (e.g., transmissibility).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Importantly, though, determining whether two genotypes actually *are* functionally distinct requires much more experimental, clinical and epidemiological data than we currently have.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Knowing if two genotypes actually *are* functionally distinct, generally requires a lot of experimental, clinical and epidemiological data.
```

<br><br>

> One of the most prominent hypotheses about SARS-CoV-2 strains compares possible "D614" vs "G614" strains. We can use Nextstrain to investigate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the most prominent hypotheses about SARS-CoV-2 strains compares possible "D614" vs "G614" strains. 
```

<!-- ############ SLIDE BREAK ############# -->
<!-- This is left-side text -->
# [D614G may be related to transmissibility, but could also be explained by geography](https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global/2020-05-14?c=gt-S_614&gmax=25778&gmin=21082&p=full)

[A recent pre-print](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.29.069054v1) suggests that a single mutation, D614G (from amino acid "D" to "G" at site 614 in the "S" ('spike') protein), may be responsible for increasing the transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2.
<br><br>

> The primary evidence for this hypothesis is based on how relative frequencies of each genotype change over time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The relative frequency of  614D compared to 614G did increase a lot over time in different geographic areas.
```

> If a given genotype is bad at transmitting, it is expected to decrease in frequency over time (and vice versa).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a certain genotype leads to better transmissibility, we would expect it's frequency to increase over time.
There are, however, other explanations to why the relative frequency of some genotypes would increase over time.
```

<br><br>
For this site, we see a number of geographic locations where initially, most viral lineages in circulation had the D allele; later, this balance flips such that most lineages have the G allele.
This *could* be a hallmark of G being slightly "fitter" than D (e.g., if it did indeed have a slightly higher R0 through increased transmissibility).
<br><br>
However, this could also just be a side effect of the natural history of the pandemic.
Early on in the pandemic, most strains exported from China had a D allele. Later, most strains from Italy had a G allele. Recently, we've seen more exportation from Europe than from Asia overall (although there's certainly some sampling bias at play here, as well).

> Thus, it could just be that this particular genotype got lucky, and spread so rapidly because it got there first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thus, it could just be that this particular genotype  by chance increased in relative frequency over time.
```
